It's not hard to become a fan of Kanye
West. It might be hard to remain one, as
with every year, he does something
increasingly outrageous. But it's really
easy to get started. At the beginning,
you hear a guy that not only has the
best ear for beats in all of rap, but
also has something urgent to say. His
music invites you in by asking you to
believe in yourself just half as much as
Kanye believes in himself. and then
already you're hooked. I became a fan of
Kanye as soon as I heard the life of
Pablo for the first time at 9 years old.
Since then, I've only grown to
appreciate his work more and more. What
really sets Kanye apart, in my opinion,
is that each of his albums represents a
piece of his life. Looking at his
discoraphy, you can watch Kanye tell and
even predict his whole life story on
record. From the kid on the college
dropout who would do anything to succeed
to the man facing divorce and grief on
da, every album is a chapter. All the
lyrics and all the songs might not stick
to a common theme, but the overall
vision is there. In this video, I want
to go through all 10 of Kanye's solo
albums and explain why each of them is
absolutely essential. The way I look at
it, Kanye himself is almost like a
character in one long movie, and you can
track his progression through each
album.
It all starts with The College Dropout,
the perfect introduction to the story of
Kanye West. This is the album that made
people fall in love with Kanye. It's an
album first and foremost about the
hustle to make it, about proving
yourself. Nowadays, a 16-year-old rapper
can get a record deal in a matter of
weeks. They make a viral song for Tik
Tok and every label's trying to scoop
them up wherever they land. Back in the
day, though, even a hitmaking producer
like Kanye West couldn't get a record
label to believe in him. The documentary
Genius captures this period in Kanye's
life perfectly. It was that time in the
early 2000s when Kanye was betting
everything on his dream of becoming a
rap superstar, fighting the systems of
record labels, college, and even rap
itself that tried to put him in a box.
Because Kanye was in this uphill battle
for so long, the college dropout had
lots of time to incubate as an album.
Kanye dropped out of college at 20 years
old, and by 26, that was when he finally
released the album. It's interesting to
consider if Kanye would have even become
the same artist or the same person. If
he didn't have to fight for so long, if
he didn't have to spend six plus years
knowing exactly what he was capable of,
but just waiting for everyone else to
catch up. The simple answer is no.
Kanye's underdog story made him who he
is today. He couldn't be the same
without it. A song like Through the Wire
wouldn't have even happened if Kanye was
signed as soon as he wanted to be. we
would have never gotten Last Call or
Bring Me Down or any number of classic
Kanye songs that speaks to that urge to
prove people wrong. He needed to fight
for recognition to become who he was.
And so, The College Dropout is
essentially a demonstration of how
completely Kanye was dedicated to his
craft. No one could stop him from
rapping and no one can stand between him
and achieving his dreams. But this album
isn't just an underdog story. It's also
a personal statement for Kanye as a
person. It gives listeners the full old
Kanye package. Relatability,
wholesomeness, and humor all blended
together with this unrelenting passion
and drive to succeed. If Kanye is the
superhero he often describes himself as,
this album shows us his superpowers and
his kryptonites. The flaws that would
eventually go on to destroy Kanye's
personal life are here to be found on
this album, but they're covered in a
kind of wholesomeness that defined old
Kanye. You can see his lust, for
example, on a song like The New Workout
Plan, but it's expressed in one of the
funniest songs he's ever released. These
flaws would become more serious as Kanye
got deeper into his career, but back
then, they were presented with this
refreshing sense of humor that showed
Kanye was self-aware and confident
nonetheless. Another essential element
of this album's backstory was the car
accident that inspired its most
important song thematically, Through the
Wire. Kanye made sure to mention the
accident in his famous Grammy acceptance
speech in 2005. You know, the one where
he says the I guess we'll never know
line. If Kanye's first album is an
underdog story, that's the final scene.
An undeniable, totally solidified
victory broadcasted on the biggest stage
in music. The accident, on the other
hand, was almost like the inciting
incident, a near-death experience that
put a battery in Kanye's back and
motivated him to go even harder after
his dreams. He felt like God was
reminding him exactly how fragile life
could be, but also showing him, as he
says in school spirit, that he's here
for a reason. Kanye was born to make
art, and he would achieve his goals
doing so or die trying. There was no in
between. Revisiting The College Dropout
is actually what inspired me to make
this video in the first place. As an
18-year-old who just graduated high
school, I hear the album in a completely
different way to how I used to. I
finally can feel exactly what Kanye is
talking about on this album, especially
the conflict between going to college
and going after your dreams. I'm not
trying to become a musician like Kanye,
but I want to become a writer and a
comedian. Currently, I'm working a
summer job 5 days a week, 10 hours a
day, and I can finally understand what
makes the song Spaceship so great. Don't
get me wrong, I always grasp the
concept, but now I feel it. And over the
past year, so many of those college
dropout songs have started transforming
like this for me. I feel what it's like
to be the artist with a dream that no
one else can see. I feel what it's like
to have to squeeze that dream around
school and work and your family's
expectations. I feel what it's like
being confronted with the reality that
life isn't permanent and time is running
out for you to do what you want before
you go. Kanye's story is an inspiration
to artists and dreamers everywhere. It's
honestly amazing that his first album
from 2004 continues to be so relevant
today. I think it's mainly because he
didn't try and twist or reshape his
message into any rap cliches. He talked
about what bothered him, what he loved,
what he saw with such authenticity that
it still resonates 21 years later. In my
opinion, that's Kanye's greatest
strength next to his taste. His ability
to live through art honestly. And The
College Dropout was the beginning of him
telling his story on record.
After the college dropout, Kanye had to
prove that it wasn't a fluke. He had to
show everyone why he was here to stay.
And he did that by taking the concepts
that people loved on his first album and
then elevating them to another level of
production value. Late registration is
in many ways a victory lap for Kanye.
Throughout the lyrics on this album,
he's in disbelief at his own success.
Whether he's dumbfounded on Touch the
Sky that anyone, including himself, ever
thought other rappers were better than
him. Or he's marveling on celebration
and gone over how he finally got what he
deserved. Over and over he's asking the
listener, "Can you believe anyone ever
doubted me? Can you believe it took this
long?" "Neither can I," he says. "But
I'm still here." Already on this album,
we can hear the character that is Kanye
starting to develop and change. He's no
longer a dreamer with his back up
against the wall. He doesn't have to
fight against the establishment anymore.
He's proven himself and that change is
reflected in the album's lyrics with the
album cover and the album title too. I
mean the idea of a late registration.
Kanye conjures up this image of himself
walking back into school late and
unprepared. But this time it doesn't
matter. No one can say anything. The
idea of being late and proud kind of
sums up this entire album's message.
Kanye is telling everyone that he will
be late for the [__] Late for what
people expect of him. He's letting
everyone know that he won't be an
ordinary artist or celebrity. He's
always going to walk a little outside
the lines and run on his own schedule.
And he can do that now because he's
found success on his own terms. As far
as the songs themselves go on this
album, a lot of people think Late
Registration and The College Dropout are
the most similar of any two Kanye's solo
albums. That's not without reason. On
registration, Kanye was essentially
taking the College Dropout formula and
elevating the production value. He
brought in composer John Bryan to help
orchestrate the album with what felt
like feature film level production. A
lot of the subject matter deals in
similar themes to The College Dropout
with notable differences that we
discussed before. The similarities are
largely due to the fact that some of the
songs, Hey Mama, for example, were
developed before the college dropout and
saved for his second album. Registration
also sees Kanye making bigger and more
complex social statements on songs like
Diamonds from Sierra Leone and
especially crack music. Kanye also
incorporates some new jazzy type of
sounds on songs like My Way Home and
Drive Slow. Meanwhile, he saves one of
his most meaningful songs ever, Hey
Mama, for this album. I think that was
intentional so that when Kanye was
finally ready to declare victory, he
could do so not for one, but for two.
You can't understand Kanye's career
without seeing that his success was
never just about himself. It was also
about his mom. Without Da being who she
was, Kanye simply wouldn't have believed
in himself as much as he did. I
mentioned Kanye's 2005 Grammy acceptance
speech at the end of his underdog story.
But an equally important moment, not
talked about nearly enough, is his
appearance on the Oprah show later that
year. For anyone that tries to tell you
that Kanye has always been a bad person
to his core, that he's just been hiding
all the evil that's within, tell them to
go watch that video. Kanye West Oprah
show 2005. If you don't already know,
that's the moment when Kanye brought his
mom on stage to perform Hey Mama for the
first time live on her favorite TV show.
If that's not making it, I don't know
what is.
3 years after the college dropout,
Graduation was the first album from
Kanye, the Bonafide Superstar. Late
registration proved it wasn't a fluke,
but after going on tour with YouTube,
Kanye set out to bring his production
value to a whole new level. A
synthfueled stadium sound. Graduation is
often cited as Kanye's most classic
album, and in many ways, it does feel
like the last old Kanye project. It
finishes his college trilogy, which
showed Kanye remaining committed to the
same general themes and aesthetics for
almost a decade, something that would
seem impossible for him to do now.
Graduation was also the peak of what
Kanye imagined his career would be from
the outset. He had moved out to LA with
his mom still acting as his close friend
and quasi manager. He was scratching the
surface of real global fame, but still
with the heart that tied him back to his
family and roots. Because Graduation was
such a commercial success, too. It also
represented Kanye officially winning the
battle for the future of hip hop.
Whether it was a PR ploy or not, Kanye
won the head-to-head sales battle
against 50 Cent and a 50s gangster rap
would only continue to lose steam after
2007. Meanwhile, Kanye's brand of
hip-hop, a sect that expanded the
stylistic and emotional range of the
genre, would only continue to grow.
Sonically, Graduation is essentially hit
after hit. It's timeless pop rap that is
aged almost perfectly. If you didn't
like Kanye before graduation, you liked
him after. This was also a significant
moment in Kanye's development as an
artist because he proved that he could
switch his style and become even bigger.
Kanye wouldn't just be a guy stuck doing
soul beats forever. He had the potential
to shift the entire genre. All this
happiness and success feels a little
ominous in retrospect. However, although
Kanye didn't know it at the time,
graduation would be the end of an era in
his career and his personal life.
Afterward, his music would become
increasingly volatile, dark, and
emotionally complex.
Now, if you're a Kanye fan, you know
what happens next. In late 2007, Kanye's
mother, Donda West, passed away from
complications related to a failed
cosmetic surgery. Also that year, Kanye
split from his longtime girlfriend and
fiance, Alexis Feifer. Kanye had finally
arrived at the kind of peak he could
only dream of before, and then abruptly,
his rap superstar life was cut in half
and destroyed. Up until 2007, Kanye had
been on one path career-wise. He was
still kind of living the way he imagined
he would before he got famous with his
mom always in his corner and his career
just focused on the art. In 2008,
however, he had to reckon with being a
massive artist while having lost the
personal bedrock that helped him achieve
that success. In a way, after his
mother's death, Kanye had less than he
ever did before the fame. He had made
it, but now lost the one person more
important to him than anything. Kanye
would never fully recover from that
devastation. You can hear him struggling
to deal with it. Even on his features
from the 2008 to 2009 era on Forever
with Drake, he wrapped all the way in
Hollywood and I can't even act. I used
to want this thing forever. Y'all can
have it back. On Put On with Jeezy, he
sang, "I lost the only girl in the world
that knows me best." Kanye wore his
sadness and confusion on his sleeve and
wrapped about it on big pop rap features
like almost no one else would. Then for
his own fourth album, he took a sharp
left turn to explore a different sound.
groundbreaking for a rapper at the time.
His exploration of autotune and more
emotional lyrics would go on to be
hugely influential on the sound of rap
for decades to come. But it all
originated from Kanye making music that
represented exactly how he felt. Being
totally honest in his art always led him
to making the most impactful music and
808s is no exception. It's interesting
to consider how Kanye's discoraphy would
have been different if his mom hadn't
passed so early on. Would he have
continued with the graduation sound or
maybe even gotten to the dark fantasy
style earlier? We'll never know. But
then again, what ifs don't represent
life. Life is unpredictable and often
full of pain. If Kanye's discoraphy is
meant to represent the ups and downs of
a life, it also has to show pain and
suffering. Those things would go on to
fuel some of his most meaningful songs
and also make him all the more genuine
an artist and a person.
Now on to the big one. My beautiful dark
twisted fantasy. The critical darling of
Kanye's discoraphy. Most rap fans know
the story behind this one, too. Dark
fantasy was in large part a redemption
story. Kanye was coming off the heels of
his first major controversy. Of course,
we're referring to the Taylor Swift VMAs
incident, as well as him beginning to
change his public image in ways such as
dating Amber Rose and generally
subjecting more and more of his personal
life to public scrutiny. You might hear
me say first major controversy and then
respond with,"Well, what about the
George Bush situation?" Well, the VMA's
incident reached far wider than other
controversies before and became a
veritable pop culture moment.
Furthermore, unlike the George Bush
situation, there was virtually no one
who thought Kanye was in the right for
interrupting Taylor. To almost everyone,
he came off, as President Obama put it
at the time, like a jackass. So, with
Dark Fantasy, Kanye had to redeem
himself by reminding everyone why they
made him famous in the first place. He's
just really [__] talented. In that
vein, the way I like to explain dark
fantasy is as an overt attempt by Kanye
to create a magnumopus. So overt, in
fact, that Kanye himself has criticized
the album for being too safe. It was one
of those rare moments as a Kanye fan
where he kind of did everything he
wanted at the time that you wanted it.
In general, Kanye tends to go against
the grain and wait for people to catch
up. He scraps albums people are
clamoring for and switches genres right
when he's caught a groove. With the
exception of his most recent work, he's
usually ahead of his time in that. But
with Dark Fantasy, the music hit
immediately. This album was Kanye
operating at maximum octane. It was also
the beginning of Kanye the album
orchestrator. He was someone who could
assemble all the right people for a
music creation experience, not just a
random new album. In 2009 and 2010, he
brought all of rap's biggest names,
including upandcomers like Nicki Minaj,
to Hawaii to work on his new music. He
made them wear suits and ties in the
studio. They worked out and played
basketball in the morning, then hit the
studio later that night. Good Friday
releases became the stuff of legend,
building anticipation for the album and
representing one of the most prolific
and exciting single runs in rap history.
In terms of the subject matter, this
album was an admission that the
celebrity life he was about to pursue
had always been a fantasy of Kanye's.
But it is dark and it is twisted. He
knows that. I mentioned before that
graduation was the end of Kanye pursuing
one type of career. People may not have
known it at the time, but that was
Kanye, the wholesome celebrity, sticking
to the art and still under his mom's
watch. With dark fantasy, Kanye was
beginning the second era of his career.
Kanye's fantasy includes his lust, which
is represented by the cover pretty
clearly. His desire for extravagance,
his attention seeeking, his risk-taking,
all the flaws that we can associate with
Kanye. He wasn't just showing these
things in his music, though. He was
acting them out in his personal life,
too. His relationship with Amber Rose,
for example, was very important at the
time of the album's creation. Kanye
himself has said that Amber was really
just a stepping stone to Kim Kardashian.
That, and I quote, "There would be no
Amber Rose if Kim had gotten with him
earlier." Kanye's plans in this regard
were laid out clearly on the song Hell
of a Life, where he just sings plain and
simple, "One day I'm going to marry a
porn star." He knows it's wrong, but he
does it anyway, which is another big
theme on this album. When Connie would
eventually turn to Christianity and move
to Wyoming, he and Kim were no longer
united by what brought them together in
the first place. They got divorced soon
after that, and the lyrics on All of the
Lights and even Gold Digger a couple
albums back became more and more
prophetic. Of course, dark fantasy, like
every album postgraduation, lives in the
shadow of Kanye's mom's death. After DA
passed, going after this dark fantasy
kept Kanye distracted from his pain for
long enough. It's something that he
would have never done or even needed to
do if she was still around. if he still
had that beacon of purpose guiding him.
The album's lyrics only really tease at
the idea for Kanye's fantasy. It's more
of an abstract concept that he addresses
loosely through the lyrics in different
songs. But again, Kanye himself reflects
negatively on this album. He remembers
being motivated by fear while making it,
or at least the desire to fit in. For a
contrarian like Kanye, that makes the
album lesser to him. But the sheer
quality of the music here is undeniable.
Fast forward to 2013, Kanye made an
album that went in the complete opposite
direction. If dark fantasy was him doing
what people wanted, Yeezys saw Kanye
abandoning everything that he was once
known for. He traded ornate cinematic
beats for harsh industrial sounds. His
lyrics went from nimble wordplay to
blunt aggression. The best way to
describe Jesus thematically, in my
opinion, is as a massive [__] you to the
industry and the establishment. The
album reflected Kanye's anger at still
being disrespected. This time, as he was
entering a new world of the fashion
industry, Yeezus showed Kanye being his
most reckless and angry self. He had
just begun rubbing shoulders with
wealthy people and cultural elites, and
he wanted to remind everyone that he was
still as volatile and dangerous as ever.
It's not hard to understand what made
Kanye switch up his sound on this album.
After Dark Fantasy, watched the throne
in the golden age of good music, it was
almost as if Kanye had mastered rap. His
postVMA's redemption arc was totally
complete. Now Kanye was getting back to
stirring up the pot. This album also
came at the time when he had just begun
dating and soon got married to Kim
Kardashian, a further degradation of the
old Kanye persona that people had built
up around him in the early 2000s.
Musically, Kanye made an album that was
more stylistically daring and therefore
true to how he felt. I've said it before
and I'll say it again. I think Kanye's
ability to express emotional honesty
through music might be his greatest
strength next to his taste, of course,
and those are on full display here. It's
definitely why Kanye himself loves Jesus
much more than dark fantasy. Lastly, the
Jesus album is also significant because
it's another moment in Kanye's career
where he felt like his back was up
against the wall. Instead of trying to
be respected as a rapper, this time he
was trying to be accepted as a fashion
designer. Either way, he was going back
to that part of his personality that
allows him to believe in himself even
when everyone else around him tells him
it's impossible. That struggle and that
self-belief manifests in the music very
clearly here.
In the next 3 years after Jesus, Kanye's
power and influence as a celebrity would
grow immensely. His follow-up, The Life
of Pablo, would become one of the few
Kanye albums that doesn't really have a
totally consistent theme or even
identity uniting all the songs. It's
really Kanye assembling a multifaceted,
multi-re experience that's an
achievement in and of itself. Simply
getting this album out was a big to-do
for Kanye, more so than any of his
previous projects. The Life of Pablo
came out during a time of big change in
his life. He was newly married, raising
two kids, and building a new celebrity
lifestyle in LA. The album roll out
reflected the chaos of this time, as did
the music. The album title itself is a
mission statement on the many things
Connie was focused on at this time,
whether it be music, fashion, or even
religion. As an album, the life of Pablo
accomplished many things at the same
time, lots of them appearing
contradictory on the surface. For one,
it forecasted a new era in Kanye's
career where he would dabble in becoming
a greater cultural force, trying to push
his narrative into the idea of free
thought and creativity more generally.
It also showed Kanye adapting to the
changing sound of hip-hop. He was
keeping his ear to the ground, becoming
an early supporter of guys like Metro
Boom, for example, and featured artists
and production that incorporated that
new trap sound Metro was known for, all
with the elevated level of creativity
that you expect from a Kanye album. The
Life of Pablo was the beginning of the
modern Kanye experience in many ways.
The roll out was complete with delays,
updates, listening parties, changing
track lists, and cryptic social media
posts. Kanye himself was also becoming
less involved in the hands-on production
of many of the tracks, acting more like
a director, overseeing the general
direction and ideas in the music. If
Dark Fantasy set out the vision for
Kanye celebrity life, the life of Pablo
is him actually living it. It's the
quintessential Kim era album. It was
also the last time Kanye would do a
proper stadium tour before it was cut
short due to his mental health concerns.
Another forecast of Kanye's future on
the life of Pablo. Kanye covers a vast
variety of topics. He makes sure to
plunge his hand back into the fire of
controversy. Think of a song like
Famous, for example. But also begins to
long for something more beyond his
celebrity life. Think of songs like Real
Friends and Ultralight Beam. These sorts
of themes would lead him to his next
three albums. And his new experience
with fatherhood definitely accelerated
his path towards Christianity.
Now on to Yay. 2018's Yay, which I guess
is a self-titled album now, is a really
special one in Kanye's discoraphy. It's
a short blast of creativity that feels
like one of Kanye's most cohesive
artistic efforts. Yay came as a moment
of clarity amidst the controversy and
public crisis that Kanye was facing in
2018 over a lot of things, but mainly
his slavery was a choice comments and
his support of Donald Trump. The album
was mainly a statement on freedom. It's
an embrace simply of the fact that we're
all still the kids we used to be. Kanye
was telling everyone with this album
that he was always going to test the
waters of offensiveness if he was going
to continue being the artist that we
loved. Very importantly, Yay came at the
beginning of Kanye's Wyoming sessions.
This was, of course, when Kanye
purchased a massive ranch in Wyoming to
use as a studio, living space, and
campus for his brand, Yeezy. With the
move to Wyoming, Kanye was beginning to
explore himself beyond LA and beyond
celebrity life. He was clearly yearning
for a greater purpose, and you can trace
the beginning of the end of Kanye's
marriage to him wanting to take this
leap. As an album, Yay represented a
further escalation and perhaps new
beginning of Kanye's mental health
struggles, his attempts to go against
the grain and shift culture that often
just appear as meltdowns when put in
front of the public eye. It wouldn't be
inaccurate to call Yay, along with Kids
Ghosts, Kanye's mental health albums. On
both projects, he's embracing his mental
issues as superpowers and reckoning with
their emotional complexity. Songs like
Wouldn't Leave, Ghost Town, and Violent
Crimes, for example, might be some of
the most emotionally mature statements
Kanye has ever made. On this album, he's
finding beauty in the struggle. He's a
fish out of water, flailing around for
purpose, but he's doing it in the most
honest, genuine way.
Jesus is King. This is an album I
consider pretty underrated, but I also
understand why many people overlook it.
There probably isn't a single song on
Jesus's King as individually great as
something like Ghost Town or Violent
Crimes, but the album is a very pure
moment. It was Kanye's attempt to wipe
the slate clean after his 2018
controversies. It wasn't necessarily an
overt ploy for redemption like Dark
Fantasy, but it was Kanye trying to
refocus after feeling lost the previous
year. On this album, he tried to
reorient his art towards serving
something objectively good. He went back
to his roots and explored more
naturalistic, restrained ways of living.
A great way to see exactly what Kanye
was going for with Jesus's King is to
watch the music videos from this era.
Both of them are absolutely beautiful,
even if simple. They show Kanye flexing
with things like family, land, and
community. Things that are pure,
wholesome, and natural, but he somehow
makes them look cool. This is a radical
departure from the traditional messaging
in hip-hop, and it's something that only
Kanye could pull off so well. On this
album, Kanye does explore faith, but not
with a whole lot of depth in the lyrics.
The album is more significant as a
moment in his life. It was almost like
Kanye taking a second to breathe, wash
his hands, and then look ahead into an
unknown future. It's some of the
happiest, simplest music he's ever made.
Minimal, not in a Yeus kind of way, but
in a way that all the lyrics and sounds
are totally pure. In order to make
Jesus's King, Kanye threw away Yandi, an
album that I and many others believe
would have been amazing. But that's kind
of the way Kanye operates. Yandi was
already trending in the direction of
Jesus's King, but Kanye doesn't deal in
half measures. He knew the album he had
to make, and so that's the one he
released.
Musically, Kanye's next album, DA, was
like Jesus as King Meets the Life of
Pablo. It was a second development in
Kanye's Christian phase and a reach
towards something greater. With the
album roll out, he reasserted himself as
a force in rap capable of creating a
massive cultural moment. It's pretty
awesome when you think about it. The
fact that he named this album after his
mom, the person who he loved most, and
then got all the best rappers in the
world to get on it and talk about God.
As became a pattern later in his career,
DA was born out of a leaked and scrapped
album that came before it. What we know
of as Da Today consisted mostly of
rework songs from the 2020 album planned
to release called Da with Child. That
album leaked in bits and pieces online
and had a couple singles released and
then was ultimately scrapped. It was
originally intended as an extension of
the Jesus's King religious themes
towards Kanye's memory of his mom. It
was also based on a more detailed vision
of a Christian-based society as well
before DA with Child. The album was in
fact called God's Country. In comparison
with Jesus's King, DA was a much more
diverse and less strictly sterile album.
Along with the songs from 2020, new
tracks were recorded after Kim and
Kanye's divorce in early 2021. For
example, jail, when you hear Kanye
singing about how Single Life ain't so
bad. These songs were probably fueled in
part by an attempt to get Kim's
attention. In fact, you end up seeing
this pretty clearly during the DA era.
Whether it be Kanye bringing Kim to his
Chicago listening party in a white
wedding dress or singing directly to her
in his free Larry Hoover performance of
Runaway. DA was already an album
inspired by mourning his mother, but it
really transformed into something darker
when Kanye realized in 2021 that he
might have to mourn a separated family
as well. The album kind of represented
the inevitable fall of the beautiful
dark twisted fantasy. It's why in the
title I defined Kanye's career as 2004
to 2021 because in many ways DA is the
end of Kanye's discoraphy proper. After
this album, his music and personal life
would rapidly decline. That's not to say
that he hasn't released good songs since
or that he's not talented. He certainly
is, but you can see the signs of what
would lead him down a darker path on DA
itself, especially on the song Never
Abandon Your Family off the Deluxe.
Now, although I don't consider it fully
finished, DA 2 does pick up where the
darker themes of DA 1 left off. Connie
once described Da 2 on Instagram as
being about running back into that
burning house, referring to the replica
of his childhood home that went up in
flames at the final DA listening party.
He also added that not everyone was
going to be ready for the smoke and he
understood that that idea really
reflects the general theme of Kanye's
solo music post divorce. By 2022, if you
think about it, Kanye had lost
everything. He lost his mother which
closed the chapter on his original
dream. The dream that motivated him on
the college dropout and even before he
had lost his beautiful dark twisted
fantasy that meant Kim and the life of
celebrity glamour. Both things he lost
when he started to look for a greater
purpose. And finally he had lost his
connection with God. He could no longer
live life as a family man. Couldn't even
see his own children and he lost his
faith. After all that Kanye, for lack of
a better term, chose to embrace being
the villain. He had no other way to
express his frustration, so he plunged
himself completely into the flames of
controversy. Kanye's newest music lays
bare all of his worst traits. Every
grudge, every prejudice, every
resentment, even every childhood trauma
he has. It's extreme vulnerability
through art. The musical elements,
beats, and lyrics that used to be good
as a given on every Kanye album before
have turned to garbage. But Kanye
himself is still the honest artist he's
always been. This time though, it just
so happens that he's empty. He's a
broken man, so his music must reflect
that. I was just thinking about it and
even Kanye's choice to work with Dave
Blunts on his new album World War II is
kind of an honest artistic choice. Not
only is Dave Blunt a reference artist,
the likes of which Kanye has used many
times before. Think Casey Pluto, Aunt
Clemens or Vory, most Kanye fans would
know those names, but Dave is also
someone whose entire brand is
self-destruction. He embraces the fact
that he could essentially die any day
now. And if you've been paying attention
to Kanye's tweets recently, Kanye kind
of seems to feel the same way. Maybe
it's a stretch. And you know, maybe this
whole video is a stretch. You might be
sitting there thinking this concept of
trying to assign narrative value to
Kanye's music is wildly parasocial. If
you're thinking that, I kind of agree it
is. But music as an art form is
inherently parasocial. It's some guy
getting in a studio and recording audio
files that you then listen to. You've
never met him, but those audio files
make you feel something as if you're
connected to the artist. When you think
about it, too, disc songs are really
just hate letters written and produced
by guys miles apart and then posted
publicly. As Drake said in First Person
Shooter, it's just two guys playing [__]
that they did in the studio, but somehow
it still affects us so much. My love of
Kanye's music is indeed parasocial, but
he's also one of the few artists where
the entire narrative of his life plays
out through his music. It's a
compelling, complex, and totally genuine
narrative. And that's to say nothing
about the quality of the music itself,
of the sounds. This whole video, I've
been talking about the narrative,
thematic, and emotional significance of
Kanye's albums. Those are the things
that I think solidify his discoraphy is
the greatest. But there's also the
quality of the music itself. And I have
to take a moment now to address that.
Simply put, no one cultivates amazing
musical moments like Kanye West. Most
people would agree about that when we
talk about his earlier albums, but I
would argue that you can still see it
with his newer work. As the years go by,
Kanye's ability to execute and arrange
things the right way has faltered, but
his ideas have always been there. People
love to say that the Vultures albums are
terrible, for example. But if you
remember those songs, a lot of them have
so much potential. What would Back to Me
be if Kanye didn't rap that ridiculous
verse and then just kept the piano in
the beat? That's a generational song
idea. Or what about Good Don't Die,
which was genuinely beautiful upon
release and it's just been forgotten
after it was taken down. What about Sky
City, which was pretty much a just
terrible version of one of the best
songs off Yandi, a song that had
incredible potential. And this is to say
nothing of the many leaked or unreleased
songs like Take Off Your Dress, Drunk,
Love Again, I could go on and on. The
point is that Kanye is still a master at
generating original amazing song ideas.
There was an amazing album to be made
from all the vultures material, but
Kanye just can't execute these days.
That's part of why it really gets on my
nerves when people say Kanye hasn't been
good since 2010 or 2016 or even that
he's never been the best in the world.
Too many people have let the current
situation blind them to the great artist
that Kanye is. It's honestly amazing how
much a guy like him was able to
accomplish in music. A guy who can't
play instruments, who can't read music,
who can't even rap about the street
life. It's really Kanye's taste, his
arrangements, and his vision for songs
that time and time again lead him to
producing the best music that's out
there. No matter what he's going
through, Kanye will find a way to make
great music out of those feelings.
That's how you get everything from
through the wire to onsite to violent
crimes and one career. Kanye's taste
takes him down different paths that
leave his music to becoming naturally
autobiographical.
At the end of the day, some people might
not even think it's worth it to analyze
Kanye given the person that he's become
lately. Well, I would argue that if you
truly understand his music, you
understand why he became that person.
It's not to say that his actions are
justified, but they're understandable.
Going back to that 2005 Oprah show clip,
that's just one example I'll give over
and over again because it shows who
Kanye really is deep down. Anyone who
watches that clip can see that he's not
a fundamentally bad person. He's just
lost everything and everyone he really
cared about.